Welcome, friends. Thank you. Good to be here once again. Thank you. Again, we have the amazing
good fortune to come together in person or at a distance to contemplate and to apply
the precious Buddha Dharma in our lives right now, this very moment, and to just
enjoy it and savor it. So we have this opportunity once more. So wow, such a big
special thing. I'll just connect to that with really heartfelt gratitude and that
sense of "Wow, what a precious, rare, special jewel or treasure I have in my
hands right now." So we're trying to activate that. It's joy and appreciation. And then at the
same time, like, wow, to extend that. Oh, may everyone, every single being, be
surrounded by nourishing circumstances that uplift them and have them be
completely connected, empowered, authentic, grounded, in touch with their own Buddha
nature, the own preciousness that they have inside, and the preciousness that's
all around us. So this bodhicitta, this awakenness, turn on, open, illuminate this
heart mind of enlightenment that we all have, this bodhicitta, great compassion
that's the root of all Dharma. So we shine that on. And then thirdly, the pure
perception, this devotion in Bhakriyana, kind of really to let ourselves believe,
like, and if we're really kind of brave and courageous, like to just confidently
proclaim the true nature as it is, it's just, it's perfect. It's here, it's
happening, unobstructed, unstoppable, just is the nature that courses through and
through of everything and just confidently, like, kind of rest in that
courageous view. So we bring those three together, renunciation, bodhicitta, pure
perception, kind of seamlessly ignite them now.
So these three, they really touch to the heart. It's like the heart drop, the
essence of the Buddha Dharma, renunciation, bodhicitta, and pure
perception. So always trying to turn our mind to that again and again, not just to
see it clearly, but to actually kind of turn, make it, you know, be alive in our
lived experience right now, pure perception, bodhicitta, renunciation. That's
the practice, to have that be an ongoing lived experience. So that's kind of our,
the practice and also the challenge, that's kind of what we keep trying to do
as followers of the Buddhist Acumuni and Guru Padmasambhava. So then in
particular, because those three qualities can activate and express and so many
varieties of ways, then we have to kind of like, somewhere locate a topic of this
time together. And so where this is located is, I was on an exercise bike in
the morning, thinking, what about the upcoming nundra? And I popped in my head,
space in a vase. So who knows, that's probably just habitual bhakta popping.
But so that's kind of, I said, okay, I'm good with that. That's a something I can
like, have a little fun with. It's very deep, potentially deep, space in a vase. So
that's the topic today for this, and then we'll go into our usual Dijum Tersar
practice. So space in a vase. So the idea that I'm kind of like, this is more like
a poetic kind of like, let's kind of like artistically play with this idea. But in
the context of the Buddha Dharma. So space in the vase. There's, we all have a vase.
This me, this is my body, my things, my memories, my emotions, my thoughts, my
experiences, my history, my trauma, my projections, my talents, my amazing
things. This sense of me, there's a someone in here doing, as a kind of like
operating the machine. There's something in happening. It seems to be happening.
And it seems to be in. And then there's this whole area called the world or
environment, or this room. This seeming outside. It really seems to be there.
There's a me in here, and there's a not me out there. And that means there's a
border. Me, the not me. So this topic kind of how I'm orienting around it is, what's
this inside? What's inside the vase? The border is where I define the me. My
things. Where I stop and you start. Where I am and then the world happens that I
get to be within. Right? Samsara out there and then a sentient being in here.
Container and contained. This is a very traditional way of talking about this in
Buddha Dharma. So the way I'd like to kind of open this today, that sense of
inside. In Buddhism there's two ways that can be. The space in the vase. The me in
here. The inside and then the outside. There's kind of two general ways of
defining this inside. What's going on? This interior felt experience. And these
two general ways are ego clinging, habitual me. And the other way is Buddha
nature. Pervasive, profound, perfect, blazingly brilliant Buddha nature. So
there's the small me. And then there's the nature of that small me. These two
ways. In Sutra Mahayana there's so many teachings on this topic. And so another
way to frame this is, how can I both be a human being and also have enlightened
nature at the same time? How can I be me? And also continue along a path of
enlightenment that dissolves the egoic fixation. How can I be me and at the same
time dissolve me? How can I let myself show up as a Drakpa? And I can like
scratch my head and I can like have worries and concerns and I can be hungry
and I can have things I'm scared of and things I love and savor. All the kind of
weird little shadowy areas I avoid and unconscious habitual bhakta patterns.
All the habitual patterns. I don't even know are there but they're happening. So
that part, that me, that embedded me, the self, me, the inside, that same me that I
felt was here yesterday and the one I felt was here last year. And 20 years
ago that ongoing continuous me. In Sutra Mahayana they locate it as being a sense
of me that's at the center of everything that's continuous and ongoing and is
more important than all the other things. That's the definition of a sentient being.
The me in here. Set sense of self that continues through time. That's the center
of the universe basically. It's more important than all the other means. So
that's one inside. And I think we kind of know a lot about that one. I definitely
do. It's the cause of all my tears. All the things that don't work. So this is
the question here. Why doesn't it work? And the answer really is in Sutra Mahayana
is that me doesn't see its own nature. It's Buddha nature. It doesn't see its
own spaciousness. So we'll take a step back. The sense of me, this small little
me that showed up 41 years ago, or the sense of you with your history and your
language and your gender and you're all the ways we identify and locate me. Right?
That human me. It's not bad. It's just how I do it. How you do it, you know, seems to
be continuing. Sutra Mahayana says actually this this sense of me has three
qualities. If we really look at the nature of this me, these three qualities
are it's seen as a substance, it's seen as a quality, and then there's a way of
seeing. This is Douglas Duckworth, scholar practitioner, Tibetan Buddhist. He
defines these distinguishes these really clearly according to the Jangang
Mipham Rinpoche. How's the Buddha nature taught about as a substance? Well, it's the
Buddha nature, the nature of Buddha. It's a nature. It's an essence, an is-ness, a
being-ness, a such-ness. It's thought of as a ground, the ground of being, ground
path fruition, the ground. If I look closely at my ego clinging, eventually I
come to see its nature. It's thought of as a substance. The second thing is
quality. Buddha nature is a quality. What's the essential quality of Buddha
nature? It's completely without any stuck, any sticking point. It is frame free. It
has no fixed vase. It is utterly flexible, pervasive, unobstructed. It is like space.
Has the quality of being like space called emptiness. Emptiness, right? Thought
of as it talked about as a substance, the is-ness. But when you actually go in your
experience, what is it like? Flexible, open, unobstructed, not walled, not contained.
It's the malleability, the freedom of that nature, the groundlessness of the
ground. Then the third quality, and Venerable Kemperomache's talk about this
in their Shirdra book, Rongtong Shentong. In this book, where they're talking a lot
about Buddha nature in this book, they define two types of two ways that Buddha
nature is generally talked about. These two ways are talked about as originally
inherent Buddha nature. This is talked about as space. It's pervasive emptiness
quality. And then the second way is developed Buddha nature as something we
actually develop, like a substance growing, right? So this is called clarity
in the Tantras. The emptiness, openness, nature, and the clarity arising
expression, unstoppable, powerful, active energy of that openness, the knowing
quality of mind, clarity. And here Kemperomache's talk about these two. We
only clearly discern these two, both the emptiness nature and the clarity energy
expression. When we see them as a union, the nature is both open and arising. It's
a space within a vase.
Emptiness, nature, constantly unfolding, expressing, connecting, arising, dissolving.
So these are talked about as the three kayas, the emptiness open, dharmakaya
quality, and then the form kaya, sambhoga kaya and Ramana kaya, this
expressive quality. So this union of emptiness and clarity, or of the three
kayas, the rupakaya and a rupakaya, all together they say that is what the Buddha
nature is like. And when we see that as an inseparable union, that is called a
rigpa, or that is called middle way view. It's called a way of seeing, it's being, a
way of being that's unobstructed, that's intelligent, it's called a knowing quality
of Buddha nature, the enlightened, enlightened, self-knowing, Rangric. So
these three qualities, this self-knowing nature, that sees the container, it sees
the expression, it sees the outreaching limp, like kind of energy, sees the
borders, the boundaries, the qualities, the colors, the shapes, the sizes, the
movements, it sees that, and at the same time simultaneously sees, it's just
illusory. It's just like a dream.
Whenever me, Drakpami, or whoever you are, whatever your name is, your sizes, your
location is, your languages, your ages, all those things, whenever that sense of me
looks at itself and activates those qualities, if it's flexible openness, it's
connective energetic responsiveness, just naturally moving between boundaries,
extending itself, caring for itself, then we can define what a healthy sense of me,
this me inside, or an unhealthy sense of me. Unhealthy sense of me is always
fighting something. Puts its wall and keeps everything out. It's really
selective what it lets in, according to very strict rules about what it wants,
that can be healthy or unhealthy, but really a healthy sense of me when it
connects to its own Buddha nature qualities, it allows itself to be
intelligently permeable with discerning clarity, it flows with life, it connects
with things dependently arising because it's interdependent, it has a boundary, it
has an identity, but it's allowed to be shaped and to shape what's happening
inside of it and outside of it, it's fluidly flexibly in communication. So I
can be a human being and also have an enlightened nature, we can have a
favorite ice cream flavor and still have an enlightened nature, we really shouldn't
see these two as being at odds or fighting each other, like to be an
enlightened being means you erase all of your all of the ways we express,
enlightened being like can express infinitely, that's why they say a Buddha
Shakimuni, that's when Rinpoche, Kambharimoche, they'll say oh it was Buddha, oh or you
could see it as Samantabhadra, Samantabhadri, or you could see it as
Vajradhara or as Vajrasattva, whichever way, all the tantras are flexible on that
because it can be steam or it can be ice or it can be water. For beings that can
flex flow in and out, what's helpful? It allows for the nature to
flex because the nature does flex, so it doesn't say I'm not gonna flex anymore
in here, that's when we get a brittle sense of me that's always trying to
defend itself because it's done an unhealthy unnatural move and locked
itself in a cage and now is trying to make the world fit in its cage and it's
doomed, the world is not gonna squeeze inside my vase, the vase will shatter. So
how can I have this expressive quality that's actually healthy? It discerns what
to let in, what to not let in, how to flex, how to flow. So first I want to
emphasize being a human is okay before that, how to become like a
Bodhisattva. Trung Purimpoche, Trung Purimpoche said in his collective works
volume 9. Don't be afraid of who you are. The key to warriorship and the ultimate
definition of bravery is not being afraid of who you are. Examine your
experience to see what it contains that is of value in helping yourself and
others. Warriorship is the opposite of selfishness. We become selfish when we
are afraid of ourselves and afraid of the seeming threats the world presents. We
want to build a little nest, a cocoon to protect ourselves but we can be much
braver than that. Even in the face of great problems we can be heroic and kind
at the same time. So how do we discern when is this small me connecting to its
vast infinite spacious quality of Buddha nature? When is it connecting? When is it
healthy? When is that interior spaciousness? Like intelligently like
flexing with its boundaries and what it can it's a clear no in a celebratory yes
and when it can really honor itself and honor others too. How do we discern that?
Because the first thing is we have to love ourselves, right? Self-compassion
it's called renunciation. We renounce what's bad for me, the causes of suffering.
I have to love myself that much to renounce all the ways I hurt and all the
causes of my suffering. I care about myself that much so I want to renounce
that because I want to be happy. So why? Then it will naturally extend the vase
extends the boundary extends it includes more because you want to be happy because
you don't want to suffer. So how do we expand our boundary to include more
space? Then his only 17th karmapa, Ojintin Lidorje, he said in his book the
heart is noble. This is such a treasure trove of so much precious advice. This is
a sense giving a sense of the difference of when we're like holding ourselves in
a way that's against other things versus when we're holding ourselves in a way
that embraces other things. So when is our vase a wall that keeps everything
out with weapons pointed out and when is our our boundary like actually like
invitation to mingle to learn more to be curious to flex flow with all the things
happening around us to be interdependent. So his only 17th karmapa he says when we
gaze out through our own window of grasping at me and mine we experience
everything as if it were being projected onto our personal frame of perception
like a movie projected onto a screen. Just as when we're watching a movie if
we observe a happy moment our heart soars and if there's a sad moment we at
once feel low. This grasping at me and mine restricts our view of ourselves. It
also severely impacts how we connect to others. It prevents us from seeing the
numberless wholesome connections that truly link us to others. We end up
relating to the world as if it were separate from us. Something out there
projected on a screen for our consumption. I'm not presenting a
philosophical view here. I'm trying to describe what it feels like to
experience the world in this way. As we look out through our window we feel
attachment and aversion. We accept or reject what we see projected on the
screen. This emotional push and pull forms a major component of how we relate
to others. This is called samsaric attachment. Egoic clinging. As sentient
being I'm very really familiar with this. So then he says another way of how to
relate to other beings maybe some five pages later. The point I want to make is
that love can be true and lasting under the right conditions. This is my own
personal view on this. Love can have this vast all-encompassing quality. It can be
allowed to spread until it permeates the very core of our relationships. Yet
often instead of giving love room to expand we box it in with our own
expectations. Expectations make our love conditional on what the other person
does or says. Our concern for the other person also becomes conditional on
whether or not the relationship fulfills our wishes. How can you expect love to
last when you demand that it meet your conditions and you act as if you're as
if you own another person. Again how can you expect love to last when you demand
that it meet your conditions and act as if you own another person. For love to
last it is best not to have too many expectations. It is better just to offer
love. I want to share with you a feeling I have. I feel that my love
I want to share with you a feeling I have. I feel that my love does not have to
remain within the limitations of my own life or body. I imagine that if I'm no
longer in the world my love could still be present. I want to place my love on
the moon and let the moon hold my love. Let the moon be the keeper of my love
offering it to everyone just as the moon sends its light to embrace the whole
earth. So this is how our sense of me can freely become the biggest attribute we
have when it connects to its nature. Like we can have like Trunk Barimba also says
it's such a funny thing about my head. Everyone loves something even if it's
just tortillas. We can have that little spark or we know what that's like and we
can open that. We all have this space inside. It doesn't have to be a locked
box. It can be just like just really outpouring and genuinely kind engaged
kindness and this is just bodhicitta. Wisdom and compassion. The wisdom to know
the interdependence. The compassion to want to extend, to want to embrace, to
want to include more and to do it carefully according to detail what's
really helpful right now. That means I have to listen to you. I have to tune in
to you. Not just what's happening in me but in you. What's happening? And then
then wow what this is the big miracle then. The space in me is the same as the
space in you. It's the same. It's the same Buddha nature. When our own ways of
holding, of expressing, when they actually help realize this is we're the same. This
nature is the same. Then we're on the path. This is the Bodhisattva path. Then
it's not a fight. It's like there's so much energy comes to want to listen to
you, pay attention, love, care, learn, see my own shortcomings, see the ways I keep
tripping up, getting stuck because I wanted that spaciousness. It just
include more, include more. It just would just be natural. Our compassion would
just naturally come. Chandra Kirti, the great master of Chandra Kirti, he said, "There's
four types of compassion." Venerable Kavramicha mentioned this in his
mountain retreat instructions I think in 2010. PSO. Four types of compassion. One
type of compassion is we see something, some suffering. Someone gets hurt. We see
it all. We have compassion. There's an object that demonstrates suffering and
because of that object, oh, we hurt. Oh, ninj, ninj, compassion, compassion. That's
one type. The second type is we don't see the person suffering. We see the cause of
the suffering, ignorance. They don't see how beautiful they are. Oh, they don't see
that anger is gonna make it worse. Oh, they don't see that attachment is gonna
doom to fail. Oh, it's so sad, you know. And we can see that in ourselves too. Oh, I
keep doing this. So sad. Oh, but I have this quality. I'm gonna bring this out. I
don't have to do this again now. That's what, confession. I was reading so many
interesting things. In Tibetan, confession means to separate from. We can see that
negative quality, the negative poison of mind, the negative habitual pattern, and
we separate from it because I'm Buddha nature. I'm not all this crap. I love
myself enough to connect to the, really, the nature. So the third type of
compassion is object-less, without focus. It's just naturally
abrasive, naturally inclusive. Compassion just is as it is. Abide in the ground,
it's naturally compassionate. It's not because something happened and it said,
oh. It just naturally includes, without limit, all the layers of facing, all the
boundaries, and it just keeps going forever because the nature keeps going
because expression keeps going. Inside, teeny teeny teeny tiny. Outside, forever.
There's no final frame. Smallest or biggest? This is really bedrock Buddhism.
Emptiness. There's no final fixed essence, core, entity, identity, totally flexible.
That's compassion without focus, just like space. It's just there. The fourth type
of compassion is, compassion arising as a deity. Chenrezig, this Tara, as Guru
Rinpoche, Padmakara. It's full, like, unadulterated, perfectly pure, majestic,
fearless expression of the nature, utter proclamation of the truth. No, no
hesitation as Guru Rinpoche arises on the lotus. All the dakinis and dakas, just all
the, all at once, all together, the seven-line prayer is spontaneously arising.
Fearless proclamation. This is compassion arising as a deity. This is what it's
like when we can play within any kind of framing.
Guru Rinpoche can be a boat, a breeze, a memory, a medicine, just like great
Shanti Deva said. The flexibility can take any framing, any vasing, and Guru
Rinpoche just seamlessly gels with what's helpful, and that's how reality is
actually unfolding every single moment. This is actually Guru Rinpoche just
helping us again and again. Why? Because Guru Rinpoche is no different than me and
you. There's space outside is the same as the space inside. So then we have to
break the vase. What does this mean? Break the vase. Break the vase means be
flexible to accommodate whatever's most helpful. It doesn't mean have no vase, no
expression, no form. It's always emptiness as form and form as emptiness. It's always
both. It means form according to what's helpful, terraform according to what
actually serves beings, and then we tried it again and again. We try to learn how
to do that better and better to accommodate more skillfully. That's why
all of Adriana's defined as skillful means is the big distinctive feature in
addition to Sutra Mahayana. The skillfulness of how we can adapt, how
flexibly we can accommodate situations. We can use food as a practice, use sleep
as a practice, use this as a practice. It's all Guru Rinpoche. So anything is usable.
It's all the same space. So this becomes infinite vase. That's why they say
in Sotun single-sphere. No final edge. Contains everything. It's infinite and it
contains all the vases inside of it which are infinite. So there's no big war.
It's only a question of what really helps right now. That's it. And so I
thought or I saw this quote and I wanted to read it because it's always the
question of once we ring with that, okay this is the path, then it's always how. How
do I serve more effectively? And this I think I want to read the whole
thing but this is like then I'll conclude with this. This is only the
sixteenth karmapa. This is good to have a kagyu, the kagyupas. It's good to have a
kagyu, really strong kagyu base today. All these lineages and schools are so
precious. So this is from his only sixteenth karmapa and it is quoted in the
book Heart Advice of the Karmapa. And it's called A Reminder to Myself. Again,
this is a question of how to become more spacious, more discerning, more skillful.
So how do we actually grow this sense of spaciousness and extend our sense of
vase? How? A reminder to myself, the sixteenth karmapa. With your supreme
intelligence, you realize the intention of the unsurpassable vehicle, the
tradition of Padmakara. Guru of unequaled kindness, I remember you from my heart. I
supplicate you, bless me with your compassion. I, Pema Trinley Palsang, a
performer of three activities from now on, will take control of my own discipline
and thought and deed. I make a firm commitment as follows to avoid
thoughtlessness and senselessness. In physical conduct, I will not allow myself
to be rootless and hurried, incapable of being still, carelessly following my every
whim. I will always hold my own space and be adorned by the training in pure
discipline. In speech, whether spiritual or secular, I will choose meaningful words,
in shun unconnected talk of past events or boring discussions concerning any of
the three times. I will always exert myself in dharmic recitations,
proclamations, and readings. In mind, I will not flutter back and forth like a
young bird on a branch. Not getting absorbed in discursive thoughts of good
and bad, I will meditate, cultivating forbearance and relying on my own
perceptions, not those of others. I will reflect on how best to benefit the
teachings and beings. In particular, the vital essence of the thought of all
victorious ones is the true nature, the uncontrived innate dharmakaya. Without
everlasting, I will sustain it with one taste in equipoise and post meditation.
In sum, I will hold myself to the sublime, dharmic conduct of the three gates, not
falling under the influence of others, arrogance, haughtiness, or thoughts of
self-aggrandizement. Whatever of these arises, I will not let them move me in
the slightest. I will remain firm, dignified, and fearless like a mountain.
Until this collection of elements has rotted away, I will not waver from this
way of being. Of this way, I will be a fearless warrior. That will be my quality.
This is my vow, like an image carved in stone. May it be virtuous. Gods and
protectors work to help this come to pass. May the virtuous signs of
auspiciousness excellently blaze.
Thank you, friends. All in all, this is like a plea. The world is undergoing so
much suffering. We all know this. Inside, there's so much suffering. I think we all
know this, too. Like Trum Perum Pachay said in the early 1980s, when he was first
presenting Shambhala teachings, the world needs us. The world needs the Dharma. The
world needs this kindness and compassion, this wisdom, this groundedness. The world
needs us. This is not the time to check out. This is the Vajrayana time. In the
fortunate, Eon Sutra, the Buddha was so clear on this. This is the time for
accomplishment and for outreaching activities. This is the time. It's the
best time. Everything outside is going to disrupt us, disturb us, trigger us,
activate us. It's going to push against our frame, our vase, really strongly. Then
we need to really take on this courageous approach, connect to our own spaciousness,
see that the spaciousness outside is the same. This is an opportunity when that
doorbell rings, when that friction happens, when the pushing, when we feel the
pushing, inside pushing, outside pushing. This is the opportunity for Vajrayana.
All the Vajrayana teachings are about how to use this opportunity. There's so
many teachings on this. The noble ones, the true noble ones, like the Venerable
Kemper Rinpoche, this one is Karmapa, this one is Dalai Sallama, this one is
Saki Tristan. So many noble ones around, like they all have exact
pithy words of advice exactly for these times. It's one click away, but then
we have to do it and we have to keep doing it, preserve it, and let it
marinate in us, and transform us, and open us, and flex us. We need to take it to
heart. So really thankful for the opportunity to be with you all, to be
with you all, really very much very thankful. It's like such a fleeting
moment. We're all gonna be gone so soon, so fleeting. Whenever I have a
little whiff of this, like now, on occasion, when dear friends pass, when
loved ones pass, then on occasion I wake up. Oh man, this is really true, impermanence
is really true. Really take this to heart. This Vajrayana time,
time to fearlessly kind of be like a lion, be like a mountain, like have the
energy, the arising push and pull of samsara, spark on a courageous view, open,
flexible, spacious nature, and this is kind of my own wish, and like really thank
you all. We keep trying, we keep going, never give up. As this always Dalai Lama
says, never give up. Thank you friends. Thank you. Thank you.
So I thought to just kind of finally complete that space and a base, space and a
base idea, is that I didn't say so much, but the base itself, the holding, the way
we hold space for ourselves, and the way we hold space for others. There's so many
ways to do that that's really healthy, and it's really finally and accurately
attuned to situations. So there's so many ways we can hold that, and I think
partly like whatever vase we have, whatever way of making sense, of framing
things, of like whatever our kind of zone that we kind of like are typically in,
that that's, it's fine, because we can't get good at all the zones. Like there's
the rich wealth in every single arena, or every, every ecosystem, every way of kind
of holding as like infinite variety of diversity and complexity, and like so much
beauty. So the big mistake to avoid that like really disconnects us from our Buddha
nature, is when we think my way of holding is the way everything has to be
held. That's the kind of fundamental mistake, and it really closes us off to
the Buddha nature and ourselves and others, because we're more rich than that,
we're more amazing than that, and others are too. But the final thing I thought,
when we forget that, which I do all the time, is the infinite history of forgetting
that, not being connected to Buddha nature, forgetting Buddha nature outside,
then I came across this brief statement, a secular statement on the
podcast On Being with Christa Tippett, and it really struck me, and it's like not
even like necessarily Dharma thing, but just if we've made mistakes from all the
time, we like misstepped, we like took our thing and pushed it on someone else, we
took our base, our way of holding, and we assumed everyone else needed to do the
same thing. Then this particular four lines were really helpful for me, it's
like I immediately wrote them down, and they're like four lines to say like
before you die. Four lines to say before you die. Thank you. I love you. I forgive
you. Can you forgive me? Then we can really connect to Buddha nature and
ourselves. If we have that bravery, that vulnerability, thank you. I love you. I
forgive you. Can you forgive me? We've all made mistakes, we've forgotten our Buddha
nature, and we haven't seen it in others. This simple secular way of just
reorienting, we can really reset everything, then we can really open up
and reconnect to this beauty, beautiful spaciousness outside and inside.